# Introduction

> Brief about why you should be interested in this document

For this document, the most important thing to know is that I am not an expert
by any means. This is simply _my_ view on how Markdown should be used and a
proposal for the infrastructure, or method, for writing. That is, the workflow.

My workflow, or the conjunction of _convention_ and _infrastructure_, works for
me, but I have tried to make it as accessible as possible while taking into
account different people and environments. I hope this widens the audience and
reduces the barrier for entry. Thereby showing as many people as possible how
cool and useful Markdown is.

This guide is split according to the workflow as defined above, meaning into
_convention_ and _infrastructure_. First, we will discuss how I think Markdown
should be used and why. Then, we will discuss the different tools to use
Markdown, enforce those standards, and export Markdown to the different
necessary formats.

The first section should be platform-agnostic, while the latter will be
split into a platform-agnostic and a _VSCode_-specific part. This is to
accommodate both the people that are particular about their environments and are
only looking for supplementary tools, as well as the people that are looking for
a complete writing system.

To be clear, I am a programmer by trade and while I have an interest in
accessibility and communication, which is hopefully reflected in the user
experience of this workflow, this workflow is still made for me, i.e. a
programmer. I think the only 'nice-to-have' is knowledge of a language like
LaTeX. This is only because it reflects a certain experience, not because it is
necessary for this workflow in any way.

Nevertheless, I think anyone might find parts this text interesting. Whether it is
only to learn about niche Markdown features or join me in exploring the vast
depth that is `pandoc`.
